KEP-24: Promote AppArmor to GA (#4417)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-node/24-apparmor/README.md

for backwards compatibility.

#### Node Status

The Kubelet currently appends the AppArmor status to the node ready condition message:

https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/5c664599a9a80f01c30d924702f7ad799f7dd956/pkg/kubelet/nodestatus/setters.go#L530-L536

The ready condition is certainly not the right place for this message, but more generally the
Kubelet does not broadcast the status of every optional feature. For GA, this message will simply be
removed.

## Design Details

### Test Plan

[X] I/we understand the owners of the involved components may require updates to
existing tests to make this code solid enough prior to committing the changes necessary
to implement this enhancement.

##### Prerequisite testing updates

None

##### Unit tests

New tests will be added covering the annotation/field conflict cases described
under [Version Skew Strategy](#version-skew-strategy).

##### Integration tests

Additional integration tests with PodSecurityAdmission will be required.

- TestPodSecurityWebhook: https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/1ded677b2a77a764a0a0adfa58180c3705242c49/test/integration/auth/podsecurity_test.go#L95

##### e2e tests

> AppArmor already has [e2e tests][https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/2f6c4f5eab85d3f15cd80d21f4a0c353a8ceb10b/test/e2e_node/apparmor_test.go],

Reviewer: Can you find any tests that actually run these jobs?

Reviewer: I did a quick search and it looks like we have jobs that cover at least some of these features.

https://testgrid.k8s.io/sig-node-containerd#node-e2e-features

Really any test in `containerd` with `-features` tag seems to cover at least some of the apparmor tests.

We should mention that in the KEP.

Author: Thanks, done.

## Motivation

AppArmor can enable users to run a more secure deployment, and/or provide better auditing and
monitoring of their systems. AppArmor should be supported to provide users an alternative to
SELinux, and provide an interface for users that are already maintaining a set of AppArmor profiles.

### Background

Kubernetes AppArmor support predates most of our current feature lifecycle practices, including the
KEP process. This KEP is backfilling for current AppArmor support, and proposing a minimal path to
GA, per the [no perma-Beta requirement](/keps/sig-architecture/1635-prevent-permabeta/README.md)

This feature graduation closely parallels that of [Seccomp](/keps/sig-node/135-seccomp/README.md).
The notable exceptions are that the AppArmor annotations are immutable on pods, which simplifies the
migration. AppArmor is also feature gated, via the `AppArmor` gate.

### Goals

- Promote AppArmor to GA
- Fully document and formally spec the feature support
- Add equivalent API fields to replace AppArmor annotations and provide a pod
  level field, which applies to all containers.
- Deprecate the AppArmor annotations

### Non-Goals

> This KEP proposes the absolute minimum to get AppArmor to GA, therefore all
> functional enhancements are out of scope, including:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This KEP proposes the absolute minimum to provide generally available AppArmor
confinement for Pods and their containers. Further functional enhancements are out of scope,
including:
```

    // Note that this field cannot be set when spec.os.name is windows.
    // +optional
    AppArmorProfile  *AppArmorProfile
    ...
}

type SecurityContext struct {
    ...
    // The AppArmor options to use by this container. If AppArmor options are
    // provided at both the pod & container level, the container options
    // override the pod options.
    // Note that this field cannot be set when spec.os.name is windows.
    // +optional
    AppArmorProfile  *AppArmorProfile
    ...
}

// AppArmorProfile defines a pod or container's AppArmor settings.
// Only one profile source may be set.
// +union
type AppArmorProfile struct {
    // type indicates which kind of AppArmor profile will be applied.
    // Valid options are:
    //   Localhost - a profile pre-loaded on the node.
    //   RuntimeDefault - the container runtime's default profile.
    //   Unconfined - no AppArmor enforcement.
    // +unionDescriminator
    Type AppArmorProfileType

    // LocalhostProfile indicates a loaded profile on the node that should be used.
    // The profile must be preconfigured on the node to work.
    // Must match the loaded name of the profile.

>     // Must only be set if type is "Localhost".

Reviewer 3: I wonder if this https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/117020 applies here equally? Sorry I didn't check, maybe you can answer off the top of your head. 

Also wording may be improved to say "must be set when type is localhost and must not be set in any other case"

Author: Seccomp already applies validation that LocalhostProfile is set IFF the type is Localhost: https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/0f817dcd6577b663f6cb22cd5080f14138e8b6ac/pkg/apis/core/validation/validation.go#L4612-L4622

I'm not sure the tightening validation was handled correctly for that, but it's been merged since 1.19 at this point.

Reviewer 3: I believe in seccomp case it was an actual security problem (minor), this is why the IFF was added.

###### Profiles managed by the cluster admins

The current support relies on profiles being loaded on all cluster nodes
where the pods using them may be scheduled. It is also the cluster admin's
responsibility to ensure the profiles are correctly saved and synchronized
across the all nodes. Existing mechanisms like node `labels` and `nodeSelectors`
can be used to ensure that pods are scheduled on nodes supporting their desired
profiles.

##### RuntimeDefault Profile

We propose maintaining the support to a single runtime profile, which will be
defined by using the `AppArmorProfileTypeRuntimeDefault`. The reasons being:

- No changes to the current behavior. Users are currently not allowed to specify
  other runtime profiles. The existing API server rejects runtime profile names
  that are different than `runtime/default`.
- Most runtimes only support the default profile, although the CRI is flexible
  enough to allow the kubelet to send other profile names.
- Multiple runtime profiles has never been requested as a feature.

If built-in support for multiple runtime profiles is needed in the future, a new
KEP will be created to cover its details.

> #### Validation

Reviewer 3: the feature is not clearly explaining what it means that AppArmor profile will be applied. The check for AppArmor being enabled or not is quite simple and not account for AppArmor service to be running. I actually don't know what will happen if one disabled the service. Will profile will still take an effect? I wonder what guarantees K8s node can give on whether AppArmor is working or not.

Author: I'm not sure exactly what you mean by this? The `apparmor.IsEnabled()` check checks whether the kernel module is loaded. We used to try and do this with the pod status, but I think if a user really wants to guarantee that apparmor is being enforced, they're better off using a 3rd party monitoring service that will actually confirm the process status (e.g. via `/proc/$PID/attr/current/`)

Reviewer 3: It may be a good idea to add this note. So there is no expectations that k8s will somehow guarantee that AppArmor was not turned off and still being applied

2. AppArmor profile must be unset on Windows pods (`spec.os.name == "windows"`). Only enforced on fields.
3. Localhost profile must not be empty, and must not be padded with whitespace. Only enforced on creation.
   This was previously enforced by the [Kubelet](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/2624e93d55375a9642977d4d5795841ab7463b1d/pkg/security/apparmor/validate.go#L70-L77).

*Note on localhost profile validation:* AppArmor profile naming is flexible, but both of the leading
CRI implementations (containerd & cri-o) require a profile with a matching name to be loaded. This
prevents the special `unconfined` profile, or various wildcard and variable profile names from being
used in practice. This validation is deferred to the runtime, rather than being enforced by the API
for backwards compatibility.

#### Node Status

The Kubelet currently appends the AppArmor status to the node ready condition message:

https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/5c664599a9a80f01c30d924702f7ad799f7dd956/pkg/kubelet/nodestatus/setters.go#L530-L536

The ready condition is certainly not the right place for this message, but more generally the

> Kubelet does not broadcast the status of every optional feature. For GA, this message will simply be

Reviewer 3: need to make sure to update relonotes in case there are any dependencines on this.

removed.

## Design Details

> 

Author: Added a little blurb, WDYT?

| 2) Using custom or `runtime/default` profile that restricts actions a container is trying to make. | Pod created          | The outcome is workload and AppArmor dependent. In this scenario containers may 1) fail to start, 2) misbehave or 3) log violations.                  |
| 3) Using a localhost profile that does not exist on the node.                                      | Pod created          | Container runtime dependent: containers fail to start. Retry respecting RestartPolicy and back-off delay.  Error message in event.                |
| 4) Using an unsupported runtime profile (i.e. `runtime/default-audit`).                            | Fails validation: pod **not** created. | N/A                                                                                                                                                   |
| 5) Using localhost profile with invalid (empty) name                                               | Fails validation: pod **not** created. | N/A                                                                                                                                                   |

> | 6) AppArmor is disabled by the host or the build                                                   | Pod created. | Kubelet puts Pod in blocked state.                                                                                                                    |

Reviewer 3: one thing here is the difference between specifying profile to be `runtime/default` explicitly and having it implicit. When it is explicitly specified to be default, than Pod will be blocked if AppArmor is disabled. If implicit (not specified in pod spec), pod runs as expected.

This difference in behavior is not clearly spelled out in documentation and would be great to highlight.

Reviewer 3: Also I wonder if test for this can be added. I doubt it will be easy as it's hard to disable AppArmor for e2e. So maybe it will only be covered with unit tests

Scenario 2 is the expected behavior of using AppArmor and it is included here
for completeness.

Scenario 5 represents the case of failing the existing validation, which is
defined at [Pod API](#pod-api).

### Version Skew Strategy

All API skew is resolved in the API server. New Kubelets will only use the
AppArmor values specified in the fields, and ignore the annotations.

#### Pod Creation

> If no AppArmor annotations or fields are specified, no action is necessary.

Reviewer 3: do we keep the annotations support virtually forever?

Reviewer 2: I like the idea of migrating the annotations and then removing them.

:thought_balloon: This could even cover a Pod that has been happily running since v1.8 or something and the node is still there accumulating uptime. Maybe all of the containers have been restarted over the years and none of the original code is running, but it's still the same Pod and the AppArmor profile still constrains it.

Author: Here is the discussion we had for seccomp annotations: https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/109819#discussion_r868722355. I think we should follow the same path here. I'll add a section for it.

> This could even cover a Pod that has been happily running since v1.8 or something and the node is still there accumulating uptime. Maybe all of the containers have been restarted over the years and none of the original code is running, but it's still the same Pod and the AppArmor profile still constrains it.

I thought we don't support in-place kubelet upgrades, so we don't need to worry about this case?

#### PodSecurity Admission

The PodSecurity admission plugin will be updated to evaluate AppArmorProfile fields in addition to
annotations.

The [PodSecurity baseline policy](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/security/pod-security-standards/#baseline)
forbids setting an `Unconfined` profile, but allows unset, `RuntimeDefault` and `Localhost`
profiles. In the case of localhost profiles, this can include OS profiles intended for other system
daemons, so additional profile restrictions are encouraged (e.g. via
[ValidatingAdmissionPolicy](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/validating-admission-policy/)).

#### Pod Update

The AppArmor fields on a pod are immutable, which also applies to the
[annotation](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/b46612a74224b0871a97dae819f5fb3a1763d0b9/pkg/apis/core/validation/validation.go#L177-L182).

When an [Ephemeral Container](/keps/sig-node/277-ephemeral-containers/README.md) is added, it
will follow the same rules for using or overriding the pod's AppArmor profile.
Ephemeral container's will never sync with an AppArmor annotation.

#### PodTemplates

> PodTemplates (e.g. ReplaceSets, Deployments, StatefulSets, etc.) will be

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
PodTemplates (and their embeddings withing e.g. ReplicaSets, Deployments, StatefulSets, etc.) will be
```

ignored. The field/annotation resolution will happen on template instantiation.

#### Warnings

To raise awareness of existing controllers using the AppArmor annotations that need to be migrated,
a warning will be emitted when annotations are set on pod creation, or pod template (including

> embedded pod templates) create & update.

Reviewer 2: Let's frame this so it makes sense to someone reading this after graduation.

support this.

On the API server side, we've already taken version skew in HA clusters into
account. The same precautions make upgrade & downgrade handling a non-issue.

Since
[we support](https://kubernetes.io/docs/setup/release/version-skew-policy/) up
to 2 minor releases of version skew between the master and node, annotations
must continue to be supported and backfilled for at least 2 versions passed the
initial implementation. Specifically, fields will no longer be copied to annotations for older kubelet
versions. However, annotations submitted to the API server will continue to be copied to fields at the
kubelet indefinitely, as was done with Seccomp.

##### Kubelet Backwards compatibility

Since we don't support running newer Kubelets than API server, new Kubelets only need to handle
AppArmor fields. All the version skew resolution happens within the API server.

### Graduation Criteria

_This section is excluded, as it is the subject of the entire proposal._

## Production Readiness Review Questionnaire

### Feature enablement and rollback

###### How can this feature be enabled / disabled in a live cluster?

> AppArmor is controlled by the `AppArmor` feature gate, but no new feature gate is added for the changes outlined in this proposal.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
AppArmor is controlled by the `AppArmor` feature gate (already beta by the time this KEP was
formally opened).
```

- [X] Feature gate
  - Feature gate name: `AppArmor`
  - Components depending on the feature gate:
      - kube-apiserver
      - kubelet

###### Does enabling the feature change any default behavior?

> No - AppArmor has been enabled by default since Kubernetes v1.4.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
No; you need to set an AppArmor profile on a Pod for the change to actually affect container / node behavior.
The `AppArmor` feature gate has been enabled by default since Kubernetes v1.4.
```

###### Can the feature be disabled once it has been enabled (i.e. can we roll back the enablement)?

> Yes, it works in the same way as before moving the feature to GA. However, the
> GA related changes are backwards compatible, and the API supports rollback of
> the Kubernetes API Server as described in the [Version Skew
> Strategy](#version-skew-strategy).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We should explain what would happen if we _didn't_ graduate the beta feature (nothing, because
the beta implementation doesn't add any API fields.
```

No

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in any new calls to the cloud provider?

No

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in increasing size or count of the existing API objects?

Negligible increase in Pod object size, and any objects embedding a PodSpec.

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in increasing time taken by any operations covered by existing SLIs/SLOs?

No

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in non-negligible increase of resource usage (CPU, RAM, disk, IO, ...) in any components?

No

### Troubleshooting

###### How does this feature react if the API server and/or etcd is unavailable?

No impact to running workloads.

###### What are other known failure modes?

No impact is being foreseen to running workloads based on the nature of
changes brought by this KEP.

Although some general errors and failures can be seen on [Failure and Fallback
Strategy](#failure-and-fallback-strategy).

###### What steps should be taken if SLOs are not being met to determine the problem?

N/A

## Implementation History

- 2016-07-25: AppArmor design proposal
- 2016-09-26: AppArmor beta release with v1.4

> - 2020-01-10: Initial KEP

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- 2020-01-10: Initial (retrospective) KEP
```

## Drawbacks

Promoting AppArmor as-is to GA may be seen as "blessing" the current
functionality, and make it harder to make some of the enhancements listed under
[Non-Goals](#non-goals). Since the current behavior is unguarded, I think we
already need to treat the behavior as GA.

## Alternatives

> N/A

Reviewer 2: My opinion: we could have a beta release that switches AppArmor to use API fields for Pod, and do the graduation to GA in the minor release after that.

Jumping in one go gives people no option to opt out of a field that wasn't there at all in the previous release.

I suggest we document this more careful approach so that it's clear what we ruled out and why.

Author: Is the only difference with your suggestion that we'd make all the changes proposed here, but the feature gate would still be labeled as Beta? Then next release the only change is to update the feature gate status? Why does that separation matter?

Reviewer 2: You can disable beta feature gates, and you can't disable GA feature gates. It'd give people a chance to discover whether the new field is problematic and opt out, without forcing them to downgrade if it is.

profiles have been changed on disk/memory, after pods started using it. However,
Kubernetes managed profiles are out of scope for this KEP.
Out of tree enhancements like the
[security-profiles-operator](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/security-profiles-operator) can
provide such enhanced functionality on top.

###### Profiles managed by the cluster admins

The current support relies on profiles being loaded on all cluster nodes
where the pods using them may be scheduled. It is also the cluster admin's
responsibility to ensure the profiles are correctly saved and synchronized
across the all nodes. Existing mechanisms like node `labels` and `nodeSelectors`
can be used to ensure that pods are scheduled on nodes supporting their desired
profiles.

#### Validation

The following validations were applied to the AppArmor annotations on pods:
- Pod annotations are immutable (cannot be added, modified, or removed on pod update)
- Annotation value must have a `localhost/` prefix, or be one of: `""`, `runtime/default`, `unconfined`.

The annotation validations will be carried over to the field API, and the following additional
validations are proposed:

> 1. Fields must match the corresponding annotations when both are present, except for ephemeral containers.

Reviewer 4: Just checking my understanding-- When annotations are set, non-ephemeral containers fields must match the annotations, but ephemeral containers fields may be set to any desired values?

Author: Yes. This is due to the fact that the annotations are currently immutable, and that restriction wasn't relaxed when ephemeral containers were introduced. The fields will still be immutable, but when an ephemeral container is added, it may set an AppArmor profile on its security context. In this case, the annotations won't be synced.

show up as `code=400` (Bad Request) errors in `apiserver_request_total`.

The following errors could indicate problems with how kubelets are interpreting AppArmor profiles.
* `started_containers_errors_total`
* `started_pods_errors_total`

###### Were upgrade and rollback tested? Was the upgrade->downgrade->upgrade path tested?

Automated tests will cover the scenarios with and without the changes proposed
on this KEP. As defined under [Version Skew Strategy](#version-skew-strategy),
we are assuming the cluster may have kubelets with older versions (without
this KEP' changes), therefore this will be covered as part of the new tests.

###### Is the rollout accompanied by any deprecations and/or removals of features, APIs, fields of API types, flags, etc.?

The promotion of AppArmor to GA would deprecate the beta annotations as described in the
[Version Skew Strategy](#version-skew-strategy).

### Monitoring requirements

###### How can an operator determine if the feature is in use by workloads?

The feature is built into the kubelet and api server components. No metric is
planned at this moment. The way to determine usage is by checking whether the

> pods/containers have a AppArmorProfile set.

Reviewer 4: I think it's okay not to have a metric.  I don't see a way to check this with kube-state-metrics either (but maybe I missed it?)

Is there anything logged by the kubelet an admin could check?

Author: I'm not aware of anything. I could add it, but I don't think we make a habit of logging every pod security setting, so it seems sort of out-of-place to do so.

I think the right way to handle this as an admin is: if you just care about configuration, you can read that from the pod configuration. If you want to check the actual runtime configuration, use a third-party monitoring program that looks at the process state.

Reviewer 4: > you can read that from the pod configuration. If you want to check the actual runtime configuration, use a third-party monitoring program that looks at the process state.

SGTM. Could we include this in the PRR section for posterity?

> ###### How can someone using this feature know that it is working for their instance?

Reviewer 5: I guess maybe also not apparmor itself but the field <> annotation bit?

Author: Sorry, I don't quite understand this. Do you mean how can they be sure that the pod had the correct API bits set? As in, get the pod yaml and confirm the annotation & fields match?

The AppArmor enforcement status is not directly surfaced by Kubernetes, but is visible through the

> linux proc API:

Author: Done.
